okay hello and welcome to everyone who
has joined us online I'm Ella Pollock
executive director of libraries and
archives at Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory and the CHL Center for
humanities and history of modern biology
which organized today's event the
laboratory is the nonprofit research
institution located on the North Shore
of Long Island New York it dates back to
1890 when it was founded as a marine
biologists station research Xillia has
led to a Nobel prizes and significant
discoveries in genetics molecular
biology and medicine the institution's
research contributed to our
understanding of cancer ALS depressions
and autism among other diseases and it
produced the first effective treatment
for the giver Stadium genetic disease
final muscular atrophy cosmic Harbor
Laboratory is now playing an important
part in research effort to help
understand and treat kovat 90 we are
delighted together virtually to bring
this to accomplished scientists and
authors inter conversation professor
Siddhartha Mukherjee is a cancer
physician and researcher at Columbia
University his 2010 books the importer
of maladies a biography of cancer was
awarded the Pulitzer Prize for
nonfiction today we will be discussing
his more recent book the Jian an
intimate history which won international
awards and was recognized by the
Washington Post and The New York Times
is one of the most influential books in
2016 the gene was inspir
the inspiration for the new Ken Burns
document the commentary of the same name
and conversation we see today is Matthew
Cobb professor in the School of
Biological Sciences at the University of
Manchester in addition to his research
on genetics and physiology of the sense
and smell Matthew has published
extensively on the history of genetics
including his 2015 book life's greatest
secret and his latest book the idea of
the brain the past and future of
neuroscience and smell he was one of the
screen experts in Jim my colleague
Richard Seaver is a moderator for this
event
Richard is a system director of the CSH
press an executive director for for the
journals CSH perspective and CSH
protocols Richard is the co-founder of
the critical resource known as barkeep
and Medicare that have allowed thousands
of scientists around the world to make
their private research available as
quickly as possible and obviously with
free access we are delighted to welcome
seed and module for conversation you can
submit your questions through the QA box
at the bottom of the zoom screen and
then Richard will present the questions
to Matthew and see it after conversation
I am so grateful to use it and to you
Matthew for joining us today see them
Matthew please thank you very much
mirror said good to see you so we
haven't ready we haven't met in the
flesh but we've had a few chats over
over zoom in the last week preparing
this this meeting I wonder if we could
start
at the beginning with the title of your
book I read somewhere that there are
perhaps 20 definitions of a gene
depending on the scientist who's using
the phrase depending what they're
interested in so I wonder if you could
tell us well what you think a gene is
and what it does and why there's this
difficulty that people have in coming up
with a definition which might appear to
be quite a simple question well it's my
pleasure to join you Matthew in this
conversation and thank you for Cold
Spring Harbor for oh sling this it is it
is actually quite clear that many people
have different definitions of the word
gene people have tried to define this
word understand this word I wanted to
use in some ways I wanted to use in the
book every definition or cover every
definition a gene is a unit of heredity
a gene specifies a trait a gene is
usually the code that carries the the
the code or the the material the
instructions to make a piece of RNA
which by itself can be functional but
more more often gives rise to a protein
which carries out a function a gene
carries information from parents to
offspring a gene is a piece of DNA
originally it was thought to be a
continuous piece of DNA we know that
that is no longer true but it is a piece
of DNA a gene in a virus can be carried
as we know from Kovach 19 from horoscope
to a gene can be carried in RNA so it's
really a piece of nucleic acid which
carries the instructions to build an RNA
which in turn carries the instructions
to build a protein
so it is like looking at the same thing
through multiple perspectives multiple
directions no definition is complete no
definition is is absolute but they are
but they're all correct and so I felt
that we needed to embrace all of them
and different aspects of the book and
the film emphasize or or go into the
idea and it's historically evolving idea
the the analogy that I like to make is
you know the word Adam means different
things to different people an atom is a
unit of matter it is the constituent
element of a molecule it is the
indivisible piece of matter but of
course we know that the atom itself is
made of divisible divisible pieces and
so much like the atom the gene the
definition of the gene is evolving it
will continue to evolve but the
fundamental piece of it which is that it
is a unit of heredity and that it is
carried across generations in the form
of a nucleic acid remains remains
basically unchanged I think we can we
can leave the rest of it and the
niceties to the philosophers of science
may be plenty of times a logic shop I
was watching the comments on Twitter as
people watched the in particular first
episode of the gene but but both both
episodes
sorry which you are in which which I'm
in but that's not what I was Breyers
watching and a number of people that I
saw my timeline were very surprised to
learn about the way that in particular
in America the history of genetics and
the history of eugenics that is of
improving the human stock as they would
have said at the time was was so
intertwined and I thought that was a
very good part of the of the film and of
your books your book deals with that as
well
I wonder how surprised you were well can
you remember when you first realize this
where you taught it at university or
school back in India what what was the
when did you find out about that and
what do you think well you know that
goes back the process of writing the
book and I you know we haven't what's
interesting is that I haven't really
talked much about aside from this forum
talked much about the process of writing
the book it was most both surprising and
also a kind of hidden aspect of American
history we the standard way that
eugenics is taught is as if it grew out
of nothing you know like a ghost in Nazi
Germany and in fact grew as as a part or
an organic part of Nazism and in and
grew late
perhaps in Nazism but when you study the
history and when you look at the
archives you realize that that's
completely not true but in fact the
eugenics movement hasn't had and that
has three distinct phases the first
phase I mean first of all maybe even
four distinct phases I would say the
first phase goes back all the way to
Plato and Aristotle and people who for a
long time
wondered whether heredity could be
manipulated but of course they had no
idea of genetics they had no idea of the
gene they didn't know the word gene
didn't know the concept so far from it
and Plato writes about it very briefly
he thinks about an ideal race he thinks
about it mathematically he thinks about
mathematical ways of greeting people so
that they would get the best possible
outcomes so that's the ancient history
of eugenics and then it mostly vanishes
from from from from at least from
philosophical writing but then there are
these three contemporary phases and we
only know about the last of them because
it's been popularly taught the first
phase was in the UK in England or in
Great Britain I would say we're as
geneticists began to understand the
relationship between genetics and
selection people like Francis Galton and
others a very very luminous characters
began to wonder whether they should
select for the best possible humans
using what they would now call positive
eugenics in other words breed the best
and make a kind of a nation of elite
there is a you know there was a famous
there was a famous saying that you know
that they would that that somehow or the
other by breeding this national elite
they would work themselves out of what
was becoming very clear in Great Britain
and its colonies which is that somehow
or the other there was a fear of racial
degeneration and that they would work
themselves out of racial degeneration by
breeding a national elite using genetics
so that's where the seed comes up
Francis Galton of course and eminent
statistician and eminent a geneticist I
would say and a biometric someone who
loved to measure things this shape of
your skull the size of your head how far
your eyes were apart yeah he had a
particularly creepy habit of wandering
around the United Kingdom with a piece
of paper in his pocket and a pin and he
would measure he would note down how
attractive he thought the women were
that's wrong yeah that itself might make
him not particularly attractive to these
women but that would be that but that
was Francis Gordon Bolton was a measure
he was a statistician he was a
mathematician he loved measurement and
he he was also a cousin of Darwin's and
so somehow or the other he thought that
he could take what Darwin had understood
about selection and what English farmers
were doing with selecting animals sheep
cows pigs and some
how translate that into into human into
human beings then so that's that's the
birth of positive eugenics and it must
be said that there were people in the in
in in England notable scholars among
them GK Chesterton who were really
really warned against this idea this was
not a wildly while the occult onehans
and the English elite embraced the idea
this was this was not it was considered
very mainstream he was like consider
taking a walk in the park and and
considered you know part of what one
should do to make a better nation and so
while these people were moving along
there were critics there were critics
like Chesterton and others who were who
said but wait a second there's something
wrong morally wrong with with selecting
humans so that's the first phase the
second phase moves us to the United
States in the United States eugenics
takes a very I would call a Yankee
practical ism
the practical ISM is let's not talk
about let's not you know let's forget
for a second about all the the
philosophical conundrums let's just do
it and so the in the United States it
was done and by the by done I mean
there's a famous story which opens the
book which is the story of caring buck a
woman who was basically and her mother
they were basically sent to a
confinement colony in Virginia so that
they would not reproduce and produce
more children and eventually Carrie buck
was sterilized medically sterilized so
that she would not produce any children
because it was thought that she was a
so-called a definition that was
made based on very very quirky and and
and largely unsubstantiated rumors and
this was a big movement this is not a
small side note people like Ellis have a
lock and others wrote extensively in the
it states that this was the way to move
the country forward to to take away the
racial dilution that was happening
because of the immigration to the United
States so that's the second phase to me
that was the most surprising phase I had
heard of Gorton but I had not really
heard of the Carrie buck case the Carrie
buck case was that Carrie buck herself
appealed to the courts and the case
climbed to the Supreme Court and there
was a there was a chilling chilling
opinion issued by no none else then then
dr. Holmes on the court which said three
generations of imbeciles is enough
thereby enabling the state to sterilize
to remove the ovaries of Carrie buck so
that she could not have any more
children and therefore breed it further
in bussiness this was a surprising
history and then finally this kind of
malignant phase off of eugenics moves to
the to Nazi Germany Hitler himself was
fascinated by the idea he was fascinated
by the idea even as a young man and then
of course when he ascended to power he
and his various associates would begin
to practice not just sterilization or
positive eugenics
but the ultimate perverse form of
eugenics which is to kill people
exterminate people based on what was
thought to be their racial and genetic
flaws and so it was particularly the
second phase this American phase the
incubation of eugenics in America that
surprised me so do you think that's
something that we need to teach at
school and so no University that people
need to understand these these roots of
their science I think it's very
important to teach that because I think
there was a normalization
and this process of normalization
enabled the ultimate incarnation of
eugenics in in Nazi Germany the
normalization occured by or was
propelled by scientists and
intellectuals and doctors and writers
ranging from you know Alexander Bell and
HG Wells and and people who you would
not imagine
everybody was eugenicist in the in the
exactly they were and there were few
critics who said wait a second this
doesn't this is you know Oliver Wendell
Holmes there were only few critics as I
said Chesterton among them who said that
there was something morally incorrect or
something morally smelly about using
human beings as objects are more
subjects in this kind of vile
experimentation so the normalization of
eugenics as a consequence of genetics
it's something I think we should teach
everyone particularly because as you
know and we'll talk about a little bit
more we are coming to an age in which we
are being we are again once again able
to read and write human genomes in a way
we couldn't before
so the technological brink has brought
us to a point where we could reinvent to
some extent a new form of eugenics and
it would it would it would recapitulate
perhaps some of these very vile ideas
about how to make human beings better
and so I think it's something we should
we should we should really which would
be even even before we get on to the the
most exciting modern technology of
CRISPR which will discuss shortly the
there was at the moment we're actually
carrying out a form of soft eugenics
we're changing the genes in the human
gene pool by genetic counseling in that
people may be given information it's
then
to them as to whether they want to have
a baby but people can then decide they
can make a choice and we are effectively
influencing the spread of genes in the
population by providing people with
information where they can then decide
do they want to have a a child or not
and that that relates to to what I
wanted to to talk about next so what you
talk about the buck case and the what
struck me in reading your book and it's
what you're renowned for is the the way
that you weave in personal stories
including stories from your own family
with the history and the bit in the the
TV series in the two programs that
particularly I found the most powerful
was the scene where the young
Englishwoman was going to get the
results of her test for Huntington's
disease which if it went one way if she
had the mutation then effectively it was
going to be a death sentence and if it
went the other way then she was she was
free and that was that was an incredibly
tense and powerful sequence I wonder
what which was the the which part of the
the the programs which aren't an exact
copy of the the emotional bits and the
personal bits of your book but which
parts of the TV programs you found
particularly telling and you were you
were pleased to see on screen so so just
all those points are important I mean
the the television series that I did
with Ken Burns is is not not a not
affect simile or a copy of the book it's
very different from the book it's I
would say we had a long conversation
about it and it's really a compliment to
the book if they work as yin and yang in
the television series we decided that
people you know that the long history of
genetics is covered in the book and we
would concentrate more on on on real
stories on contemporary stories of
genetics and that was a very complicated
decision because Ken Burns of course is
a also a historian but we felt that you
know if we went into the depths of the
science we would we would miss
what genetics is what's happening in
genetics today now that said what no one
knows I think and it's the first time
I'm talking about this initially we had
the idea of me going back to Calcutta or
Kolkata and meeting again my cousin who
has a very severe variant of
schizophrenia and has is permanently
hospitalized and we decided against it
for several reasons but that was one
idea that that was in the film and that
you know that would have been it would
required in an enormous effort my
biggest concern about that is that it
was consent I couldn't imagine how he
would give consent and now he would
understand consent so we decided that
you know with people with mental illness
you know the idea of consent is is very
important and being on a very public
forum like like television would have
been extraordinarily complicated even if
we could move a television crew and I
agreed to do it I was very hesitant
about the idea of consent and so I'm
certain that something certainly
something we can talk about now the
question you asked was you know what
were the moments for me that were that
were incredibly moving
I I will say both on one hand finding
you know as I said you mentioned the
woman with Huntington's disease finding
her finding her finding out her
diagnosis and but equally the child
being treated for spinal muscular
atrophy you know one child in my family
dies and then they have a new child they
have another child and devastatingly you
did find out that the second child also
as the disease and you can imagine
what's going through that family's
dynamics or its or its reign you know
one child has just died in the new child
has been born and he too carries the
mutation and in the middle of all of
this of course the the drug for spinal
muscular atrophy which is really a
genetic drug comes around and this child
begins to walk he is it's it's really
one of these examples of miracle
medicine when I saw the footage of that
child walking I really nearly broke down
and cried because it was just incredible
and finally I would I would say that you
know spinal muscular atrophy is a
relatively rare disease there is a
there's beautiful and very important
footage off of a young african-american
man with sickle-cell disease you know
very difficult to treat normally because
the only things that we really have our
oxygen and pain control being given a
bone marrow transplant with a modified
gene that will essentially relieve the
symptoms and enable him to not have
sickle cells anymore and we follow his
life and in one of the last scenes in
the film he's sort of playing uno with
his with his family and his you know
requirements for going to the hospital
and being transfused
and the pain that accompanies that have
diminished dramatically so all of these
success stories were were really
gratifying yeah I think that the case of
sickle cell anemia or sickle cell
disease Rather's it's called these days
is so important because there are so
many people who are affected by it
generally but not entirely
african-americans in in the America or
Africa Caribbeans in in Europe and of
course the massive African population
and yet often it's completely kind of
overlooked in favor of other other
diseases that can be treated but as you
say with the possibility of the new gene
editing techniques then with the right
care this is a disease that can now be
cured in principle and we saw an example
of that I wonder if we could say that
move on therefore thinking about
precisely CRISPR and other gene editing
techniques in general for the reasons
you've outlined because of the eugenic
past of of our science people are
extremely wary and there is a moment a
general agreement that we should not be
editing the germline the eggs and sperm
so editing a cell that's going to
produce your blood cells I think in
general people are okay with that if
it's safe they don't think there's an
ethical problem but the ethics of
changing the future generations is seen
as being the that's the wrong thing to
do and the opprobrium that fell on dr.
hurt when he carried out his experiment
on those turns out to be three little
girl and female embryos 18 months ago
demonstrates that however what how could
it what possible harm could it do say to
remove those that the part of the
huntingtin gene that causes Huntington's
disease
what if we could do that accurately and
safely where can it go wrong because we
know what the gene does in me and you
and we'd simply be turning it into that
version do you have a view on this it's
a complicated difficult question but
we're all gonna have to face it
yeah we're facing it now I would there
are several comments to make well first
of all just an anecdotal comment again
just to give you a flavor of how the
film was made when the film was actually
complete and edited when doctor her
announced the birth of what he calls
Lulu and Nana the two the twins that
that whose embryos he had edited and I
called up Ken and I said this has got to
be the beginning of the film so we
reopened the the fully cut film and
inserted back in this episode to because
he couldn't ignore it no so so that was
necessary the piece of I would piece but
look there are the one very clear line
to be drawn here is that the the genes
that we if we are to start editing human
genes in sperm and eggs or sperm and egg
producing cells it's the first thing is
it has to be safe you know like all of
Medicine the the the main the first
concern is safety safety for the for the
child and remember this is an unborn
child the features cannot speak the
parents are speaking on behalf of the
fetus
so it's an unborn child so the first
concern is safety and again around that
concern is the understanding of consent
again the fetus cannot consent the
embryo Lulu and Nana did not consent to
anything and in fact we now know that
the consent forms for the consent for
that procedure was very badly badly done
the second idea I think that's important
is is that the world has clearly
understood that there has to be some
sense of extraordinary sufferings
associated with with that genetic
disorder whatever it might be and it
really has to be extraordinary it has to
cross the threshold now what's
extraordinary you may be different from
what's extraordinary sounds in here but
in general the idea that there would be
that you know I think that most people
would agree that Huntington's disease in
its fulminant form is an extraordinary
as a disease of extraordinary suffering
for patients so so so that's the second
question or second strong line line in
the sand that we've drawn the third is
so they said the first is safety
the second is extraordinary suffering
the third is that we should have an
enormous degree of confidence that
altering the gene will indeed alter the
physiology or the future
fate genetic fate a physiological fate
of the individual and we don't know this
for many genes actually so you may think
we know this for many genes yeah and and
there's a there's a popular press idea
that they do not for many games but you
don't and this is an extraordinarily
important point we we do know that women
who have a higher risk of breast cancer
may have a mutation in the gene Braca
one what we what we don't know is how
many people with how many women with
bracket1 develop breast cancer in the
future so we we have very strong we now
know actually for rafa one might a much
better way because we've done these
studies but for most genes we don't know
we usually look at genes retrospectively
if you have the disease do you have the
gene but we rarely have looked at the
editage in a genetics prospectively if
you have the gene do you have the
disease so what is at this point that
I'm making this third point I'm making
is that far from trivial point because
genes are modified by the environment
they're modified by other genes they're
modified by chance they're modified by
various other things so you really have
to be confident that there is that the
genetic change that if you do make for a
disease of extraordinary suffering that
you are making this in good faith that
you will relieve the disease and finally
I would say that that you need to make
sure that there isn't another
alternative so for the for the child
will sickle cell anemia if a bone marrow
transplant with minimal conditioning you
know I'm a hematologist this is what I
do with with minimal conditioning so
that it does not set that child up for
risk of future cancer for instance then
you can do an autologous bone marrow
transplant and cure sickle cell anemia
then why go into the germline where they
may be safety concerns so I think that
these are some of the criteria that we
are developing over time and as I said
safety first
extraordinary
suffering the the strong conviction that
correcting the gene in the embryo or
sperm and eggs will actually correct the
disease and finally that there is no
other alternatives and there is no other
that we're not doing this in a in a in a
forcible way I think such at least one
degree away from the spectre of eugenics
but it's not the it's not the solution
we still will need to keep on monitoring
and continuously trying to understand
why and how and where we're going with
this technology so to ask you almost a
kind of political question how how can
we decide that because it's too
important to be left to the scientists
or the physicians it's this this is a
problem that the whole of humanity is
going to have to face how can we ensure
that there's sufficient involvement of
the population that people realize the
opportunities and the dangers and can
help as a community as a global
community come to some kind of agreement
as to what is acceptable well I think
the first step is education
understanding what technologies are
available and what the safety of those
technologies are and how we've used them
before what the track record is and for
those technologies so that's the first
step and that's why I hope the book and
the film are really able to bring those
two things to the front to the front so
so that's the first step the first step
is as I said a technological education
the second step I think is to create a
consensus and it's very very important
because we have some models for this
when recombinant DNA was first
discovered actually by my former mentor
Oberg among other people you know there
was a there's a few roar there was a
very great worry that we would start
playing with genetics in a way that was
not safe and so many many meetings were
organized among them the most famous of
them is a SIL amar
the Asilomar meeting which really put
some strong boundaries around what was
permissible it was not permissible
what's important about this sillim our
meeting I think is that it was not just
a meeting of scientists journalists were
invited legal scholars were invited
bioethical debates were encountered the
general public was invited so this is
what we're talking about is the human
genome it is the thing that you and I
possess in common and it is a it is a
you know it is not up to lab scientists
or doctors and white coats to decide
whether to move forward or not so I
think there is going to be as I said a
lot of Education and a lot of consensus
building before we should do these
experiments and the question really
arises if we should do these experiments
one could make a strong argument that
that you know there are some diseases
where you could use genetic counseling
and and what is now called prenatal
genetic diagnosis to not have a child
with for instance carrying the
Huntington's gene or the bracket1 gene
so should we go that way and and let
this let this let this specter of
genetic alteration on the side or should
we allow for diseases of extraordinary
suffering the possibility of editing the
human genome in squirmin eggs
so in surely we're going to be taking
the the questions because I consider in
piling up Richard we'll be assembling
them I wonder if we could before we move
on to that if we could shift gear I'm
interested in the way that you write I
mean I've written a book which partly
overlaps book contains a bit of what you
you wrote and it was very interesting to
see the differences between how we
approach the topics and your
your way of writing it seemed to me as
I've already said I much more personal
almost artistic touch and I wondered
whether I mean you're a physician
you're a scientist but you're also a
physician and physicians as I think
you've just eloquently described have a
a rather a more a rich of you I think
often of problems than somebody who is
simply like I do
studying flies you've got a you know
seriously and so I wondered whether you
thought I'm interested in their link
between the way medicine science and art
so on a personal level
your wife's an artist she's a famous
famous artist serrosey have you ever
worked together do you think work
together extensively privately in the
sense that you know she reads everything
I write I'm sitting actually in the
studio in Sarah's studio in in the house
where I'm looking at you you can't see
them massive eight foot by eight foot
paintings that she's just finished but
we worked together privately we critique
privately but we very very rarely have
done public events together we probably
have done two or three partly because we
just don't think that you know you know
the public events end up being have
ended up being too far of a crossover
but but but and it's very hard to cross
that in half an hour or 45 minutes yeah
you know if we did a public event and it
was two hours long and we bore people to
death we could we could certainly do it
but we've done very few we've done a
couple so as far as medicine is
concerned you know I think of myself
primarily in writing and not as a
scientist right about as a physician
writer and that's very different it's
why for instance the book may to some
people move fast or even gloss over some
aspects of genetics but
really focuses quickly on human genetics
and I wanted this to be a book about
about human genetics as much as it is a
book about the history of genetics and
therefore the title it's an intimate
history an intimate by intimate I mean
not just the history of my family but
the history of our human family and and
that was a it was a common a common
critique of the book that it was a you
know this book should have been called
the the you know a book of human
genetics which I'm fine with
and it's correct in fact but there is
you know when you write a book you have
to choose otherwise you would write
2,000 pages and this book was originally
about twice its length and so a lot of
things were moved into footnotes a lot
of things were moved into side notes etc
it's like making the film again you have
Hughes so you know it's not making work
of art in a way it's like my experience
of writing especially the editing is
it's like sculpting what a sculptor says
is you know you're removing the things
in the block of stone and you've got to
remove the stuff from it and a sense
sometimes you feel yes I've just got
that right that's what it's supposed to
be like yeah and also you know the story
that the stories of genetic scientists
is obviously interesting and important
but as as you as you've done yourself
I've read your book of course and I
loved it but but a fly geneticists would
write a very different book than a human
logic geneticist you know I I mainly
study the genetics of blood disorders
and try to cure them you know I do
transplantations among other things and
so it's a very different history it's a
very different story and I I think that
understanding those differences is
crucial to reading a book a book written
by a physicist turned geneticist you
know what is life the famous yeah
building the book is very different from
a fly geneticist writing about genetics
the human human epidemiologist writing
about genetics and in this case a
medical doctor writing about genetics
and writing by his own family history ok
Richard have you been going through the
questions Jonah yes there's quite a few
that have been coming in it's now it's
great you've actually touched on some of
them there's a lot of queries about
ethics that I suppose the first most
important question in some respects is
will this all be on YouTube towards the
answer is yes they will but I guess it's
also there's a lot of fun of follow on
from their careers about ethics that
you've been asking sit one of these was
do you think we need a change in in
teaching the way we teach genetics the
different way we teach biology 101 you
know this notion that there it comes as
a surprise to learn that there was a
prehistory to eugenics before the Nazis
and the extent to which i'm geneticists
themselves were entwined in the board of
population did so do you think we really
need to think again about how we teach
genetics and bile is when people first
come across these concepts um yeah it's
an important question Richard and the I
think that you know not to plug this
book but to plug a whole series of books
there should be a curriculum in which
every basically every college student in
a science track and perhaps even in
humanities is taught something about
genetics because Darwin and Mendel and
the great synthesis and the the
subsequent enormous strides and leaps
that follow are part of human history
and human culture they are not just part
of scientific history and scientific
culture so I know that that the gene is
now part of the curriculum so while
you're you know making you know punnett
squares to figure out you know how
means a certain set of genetic traits
might be transmitted you can also read
about the social history and the
prehistory of genetics and they
complement each other you understand
that this this punnett square you've
made on the blackboard or this Mendel
you know you know when you learn about
Mendel's experiments and what he did
statistically I began to have enormous
relevance in in human social history in
human legal history as well and I I
generally encourage when people have
lots of people have reached out to me
educators professors and I say you know
this is you're not going to use this
book as a textbook we use this book as a
as a as part of your curriculum to
emphasize to people who want to
understand genetics to understand that
there is that there's something beyond
the textbook and that the things that
you're learning in the textbook have
consequences outside it Matthew how do
you teach a fly genetics course and and
what do you do about well we we have
history of science courses as well that
teach this and in the history of when
we're teaching genetics we probably
don't go into it as much detail as we
details we do but my colleagues at
University College London have done
exactly this Steve Jones the famous
geneticist popularizes or science he's
now an emeritus professor but he still
has and he's done this for about 20
years he teaches their students the
eugenic past of Francis Galton and they
have to do this because Dalton is linked
with UCL they have Dalton lecture
theatres and they've had a huge Rao
about what they should do about all this
this legacy of a man who as you said is
statistic extremely important because of
his contribution to to statistics but
there's other things we can learn from
him bad things we need to look mistakes
we mustn't make so I certainly UCL
that's been at the heart of all of the
genetics teaching for about 20 years
including the teaching they do for the
medical students so yeah a part of the
UK scientific
has learnt this for many years I should
say one more thing which is that you
know when we started the film actually
we were going to start the film with
Victor McKusick Victor McKusick is very
well known as as the person who started
one of the first human genetics programs
in the United States and he would often
go by himself to a mesh pouch II to
study human genetics and he was among
the first people to talk about genetic
disorders again at a tradition that
began in in Great Britain and then was
moved to the United States so so yeah so
I've been encouraging people to take a
much more sort of global view around
sculpture in the round view of genetics
Richard maybe we should go on to the
next yeah there's a couple a couple of
related ones yeah one is do you think
that things like your book will
encourage more animals in the
understanding of nature versus nurture
which is obviously being that debate has
been going on for a long long time and
most analysis will say it's a bit of
both and there are reasons to be
optimistic that people think that that
message getting across but then there's
also reasons to be pessimistic that
people seem to be reverting to more
genetic driver for certain certain
tendencies between talk less about well
you know the book try I mean I try to
beef I tried to be fair to this question
of nature versus nurture in the
following manner I think that the debate
has become polarized and in becoming
polarized has become has lost its
bearings to some extent if you have the
mutant version or the disease-causing
version of the Huntington's disease gene
then it is very very likely nurture
aside that you will develop the disease
in your adulthood that is a nature so
that is a genetically dominated disease
on in in contrast there are other things
that have you know where the environment
modifiers genetics so dramatically that
you may have a very mild version of a
disease even if you carry the genetic
predisposition to it and in fact breast
cancer is one example of this we now
know that many people that their
modifier genes modifying behaviors we
know this about common things like heart
attacks
we know that coronary disease is caused
there's a strong genetic component to it
it is caused by multiple probably
hundreds of genetic variants
accumulating as it were in a person's
genome and yet there are people walking
around rare people rare syndromes in
which just one gene will make will give
you a risk of you know 50 times the risk
of the population of coronary disease so
I think this is a an arena where nuanced
discussion about what exactly nature
means and what exactly nurture means and
it's not always going to be nature plus
nurture sometimes it's going to be
strongly dominated by nature sometimes
it's going to be strongly dominated by
nurture and many times or more often
it's going to be some spectrum in
between and and so there has to be I
would say some specificity to the
conversation when you say nature versus
nurture the question I usually ask is
nature versus nurture for what or what
gene for what condition are we talking
about breast cancer I'll be talking
about coronary disease are we talking
about Huntington's disease are we
talking about spinal muscular atrophy
are we talking about you know a variety
of other diseases where genes are
extraordinarily strong determinants of
whether the disease happened and no
matter how much you try the genes
James will drive the disease I think
it's important also for at a human level
because if we begin to confuse the idea
of nature versus nurture then we also
ascribe blame to people who cannot
modify a Chur to defeat nature and they
feel defeated by it there are there are
conditions still where the genetics are
so dominant but no matter what you do
you're not going to reverse it
you're not going to suddenly be able to
change and it takes the blame away from
for instance parents a parent of a child
with severe cystic fibrosis and
certainly protect that child from
infections but the child will and may
manifest the various complications of
having two mutations in in the two any
news of the cystic fibrosis gene it's
not the fault of the parent it's not the
fault of the child it is the the deck of
cards the genetic cards that that child
was dealt and so I think having a
nuanced conversation when average people
say is it nature or nurture I always
asked back Oh
regarding what what is the gene what is
the condition what is the ailment what
is the trait that we're talking about
and in some cases it will be one in some
cases there will be other and in many
cases it will be in between yeah I mean
one of the points you make there was
that it depends on which disease you're
talking about another question that's
come up in as being is how much of it as
a problem that the things that we are
looking at in into the population
genomics are informed by the fact that
most of the studies of genomics have
been done on Caucasians and how follow
Matic is that when actually you know
most people in the world aren't and the
diseases that they may be affected by
are difference well so I think it's a
big problem I think that we have several
diseases where there are strong genetic
components and therefore we need to
figure out we know that there's strong
genetic components but
they are passed on in a hereditary
manner and it would be very very helpful
to have a much broader genetic database
in which we would understand this so I
just have to be one example prostate
cancer among african-americans is one
example there are several others beta
thalassemia and others where our genomic
databases are quite poor in capturing
populations which are not Caucasian and
so those are extraordinarily important I
think we are finally seeing projects out
of for instance China West Africa India
and other places and often there is an
overlap between what's in the Caucasian
population but the overlap is not a
hundred percent and so there are new
genes or new risk alleles that are found
in non Caucasian populations which are
important to understand and their
biology and also understand what kind of
risk they confer so this is this this
project is broadening although it's
taking longer than one of the vote in
question sorry nothing other related
question to that which I'd be interested
in both your perspectives on is there
the fact that now lots of people are
having their genome sequenced this is
becoming much much easier so the I mean
of many you talked about and genetic
counselors but the possibility for
almost everybody to have their genome
sequence that ain't trivial cost and the
privacy implications for that house
there have been a couple of questions
around the issue of society and politics
and how does that change things and and
where than one can given how easy it is
to sequence something get home now
really expect any form of privacy going
forward and do we have to think about
new legislation to protect people
well so the privacy privacy concerns are
becoming progressively important because
we're entering I should say that we've
entered a new phase of genetics and I'll
let Matthew comment on this in one
second but we've entered a new phase in
genetics in which I would say for human
genetics the first genes that we began
to link to disease were genes that have
a powerful contribution to the disease
so single genes that have powerful
contributions to disease cystic fibrosis
being one example breast cancer Braca
one and others being other examples so
these are genes I call them shove genes
or shout effect genes these genes shove
you towards a particular disease or fate
or a particular disease what we're
finding out as computational power grows
is that there are many human diseases
which which we knew were hereditary in
the sense that they were carried in
families where the effect of any single
gene is quite minor but the accretion or
the risk of multiple genetic variants
adds up to give you the full risk of the
disease a great example of this is
coronary artery disease again heart
disease is very common there are people
who have in coronary artery disease you
can be about 4 percent of patients with
coronary artery disease will have
identifiable mutations and single genes
that will have an enormous effect and
increase their risk by a very large
percentage most people with coronary
disease are is it's a result of genes
and by an environment for instance diet
exercise hypertension smoking but genes
do play a role in this disease and we
now know from a whole bunch of studies
that in fact many done in the UK that
the genetic component cannot be
underestimated that they're that in fact
there is a struggle
is that there is a genetic component but
that genetic component is carried by
multiple genes not one hundreds perhaps
even thousands of genes each giving you
a little bit of risks like all these
nudge effects or not genes each giving
you a little bit of a heightened risk
now the problem is that as we enter this
new phase of genetics where we are
beginning to break apart the egg of the
nudged genes privacy becomes
extraordinarily important because you
can get the if you sequence your genome
Richard or Matthew or me or Mila if you
were to sequence a genome we would begin
to find risks and quantifiable risks for
diseases like coronary disease for
conditions such as obesity for diseases
such as breast cancer and many others
and therefore the league if an insurance
company will define this out you can
imagine that they could they could do
things that were not that we think would
not be allowed under current current
understanding of insurance so the
privacy question has become very
important and the possibility of genetic
information leak has become very very
important now Matthew any thoughts about
that
well yeah it's as you say the UK is
particularly strong on in this area
we've got something called bio Bank
where there's about a hundred thousand
people across the country including my
sister actually who have volunteered to
have all of their physiology and their
medical records linked to their genomes
and that way researchers are able to
look for correlations between very small
variants as you've just indicated these
nudg variants in their DNA and
particular conditions and at that very
high level you're going to end up
getting insight into the kind of
processes that are taking place we don't
have the worry about medical insurance
because we have a socialized medical
system where it's free to the user which
is great and but I think for those
people
the viewers and listeners who have
carried out one of these tests that
proves their 20% Viking or whatever
nonsense it is just remember nothing's
free and you've paid for it and in fact
you've given them your DNA and you've
also given them a lot of details about
yourself and that's that's their
business model these these databases
from the companies that have sequencing
not a full sequence of your DNA but
they're looking at bits of it are going
to be used in various ways so the who
controls the databases becomes
incredibly important and in the UK there
was recently a huge Rao because this bio
bank database was going to be exploited
by Google in ways that weren't entirely
clear to many members of the general
public so I think in the milk misses
this is your DNA I mean the most I mean
it's it's more personal to you than your
credit card it would be like it would be
like distributing your credit card
information to a company and saying you
know take it and use it as you will just
give me you know give me back I don't
know of course you're you're leaving it
everywhere as we know from every episode
of CSI you could you're throwing this
stuff about you shake hands well we
don't shake hands at the moment and
you're you know so clearly from there's
all sorts of fantasies about well why
don't we just have everybody's DNA
sequence when they're born I mean that
could help the medics and it could help
the police and if you you know if you've
gotten done nothing wrong then you've
got nothing to hide but I mean I don't
think there's many people who seriously
are advocating that but I think that's
that's an aspect that whole the
sociological political problems
associated with our genes with our our
intimate life as you rightly say they
we've all got to watch that like hawks I
think yes moving on society from a
dystopian view of the future
there's been a feud a few questions to
both Matthew about more personal and
Immanuel own approach your own
approaches to information and
one of them was you know how do you both
stay and both keep up with the deluge of
information and you know how does this
inform your writing process and your
choices about narrative in terms of you
know the cases in YouTube I mean you
mentioned some of this earlier but that
the example do you choose and so there's
a few questions about your writing
process one of you a Matthew do you want
to speak well let's sit first is his
only surprise winner you know my general
rule is that I try to emphasize I try to
have my general rule is that no two
pages of a book should pass without
encountering a real human being that's
just my own rule I use it whether that's
me whether that's a scientist whether
that's a patient whether that's a
Discoverer whether that's a piece of
social history that's my general rule of
writing because I believe that you know
these things have human consequences and
you know as I said there will in every
book about every subject is different
and you just have to accept that there
will be you know during the editing
process there are people who go away
from the book people who leave the book
because you can't have if you write
about every single person the book
becomes a kind of an a what I call name
salad named salad is a very very bad
thing to do to a book because you then
become unreadable
it's an unreadable book you produce a
document that no one would read and
therefore has really no consequence in
in contributing to the conversation so
you have to make choices and be ready to
be critiqued by people about the sources
people are disappointed in those choices
but you have you know as a public figure
as a writer as someone who writes you
know regularly for The New Yorker for
The Times not a day will pass by when I
would get 50 letters
by email or 40 or 30 saying you know
what a wonderful book thank you so much
and then ten of those will say why
didn't you include my mother and you
know what about my my great uncle who
you know did this and I I'm generally
humble about it I generally thank them
gracefully and I say look I mean I you
know that book couldn't be written that
book would be 2,000 pages there's an
encyclopedia and also the other
philosophy that I have is that and I
often say you know I often tell people
as directly I say if you're the kind of
person who opens my book and looks for
your own name in the index this book is
not for you no that's it exactly
so so if that's if that's the motivation
this book is not for you because you
know more about the topic then if you
know if you're in the index know more
about the topic then then I do so so
that's that's my that's my general set
I'm being facetious about it but but you
can't write that book that book it
cannot be Richard it will be an
encyclopedia which is unreadable and so
you make choices and you have to sit
with those choices I mean you know I'll
give you one example of this very
particular example I happen to know
Marshall nirenberg family very well and
their collaborative he's his second
wife's son is jumping Wiseman a very
very great scientist is actually a very
close friend of mine and for reasons
that have to do with the structure of
the book you know of course we nirenberg
of course was a person who deciphered
that triplet genetic code but for
reasons that have to do with the
structure of the book you know of course
he was mentioned but the entire story of
the triplet deciphering was condensed
into one paragraph when I look back I
thought to myself Gaussian
perhaps that should that was a wrong
decision but you have to live with those
decisions
exactly Richard I was gonna say that I I
think that the the key point is what
kind of city just indicated that you end
up with kind of two thousand pages or a
huge great big thing and then you've got
to edit it and the secret of writing is
in rewriting because the first draft or
even the second draft of virtually
anything is crap and it's full of all
sorts of baggy bits and it's only by
going over it and over and over again
and chipping away like the sculptor and
removing the bits that you thought were
important but then you realize that it
makes the reader trip up or it takes
them down a side track where it doesn't
go anywhere and you've got to keep the
keep the story going keep the pace going
and you know sometimes we've all got
little factoids little stories little
darlings that we love and we don't kill
them all but that is that rule kill your
darlings I think is a very good one for
eat you know that's the factoids that
you have chiseled out that you've
discovered and is really exciting after
a couple of months you look at it and
you think nobody actually cares except
me let's let's get rid of it it doesn't
enlighten us I'll give you another
example and it was actually actually
example it's of course Spring Harbor and
it's an instructive example you know
Barbara McClintock was so far ahead of
her time as a scientist that it was
impossible to fit her into this book she
invented a whole lineage of genetics
which we are now finally discovering
particularly around transpose arms and
CRISPR and so forth genetic modification
and I tried and I tried and I tried I
tried to fit a jam her in here jammer in
there she was just so far ahead of
everyone else in terms of thinking about
James that it was really impossible to
fit fit her in so the best I could do is
put in a footnote now if you're a
Barbara McClintock fan and I am
personally you would say how dare you
put
you know of all people barbara
mcclintock in a footnote but there was
no way because she was so far ahead of
of things i mean she could have come
back in a kind of crisper episode I
suppose but but there's just sometimes
you just have to meanness you're stuck
with the I mean no one knows this of
course because the Barbara McClintock
fans would now start writing to me
tomorrow and say wow why did you you
know here's a here's a perfectly good
place that you could have put Barbara's
work or doctor mclintock's work I would
say but she was again so far ahead of
her time in thinking about mobile
genetic elements and genetic
recombination blah blah blah that it was
just it was you know I tried and I tried
I tried it was a big paragraph on her I
finally moved it to the footnotes there
was nothing else to do and I have to
have to now live with it maybe another
edition of the book which will come out
you know now that we know more about
CRISPR they'll you know we'll have a
chapter on on on mobile elements and and
and she can she can come back to life in
in this book coming up on time but that
one more question to both before I hand
you back to Neela come a couple of
people have asked this which is who are
the figures that inspired you and and
what what are the things that you know
and presume you're working on you but
what are the things that you would
recommend that other people read I mean
I'm right behind your right shoulder I
see Cicero said so I don't know list but
yeah I think people are very interested
in math you know I always from but
there's apparently a whole whole meme
going around of the books that are in
the back of people and they when they
when they're on unzoom chat so I'm gonna
look back and see you know what among
this is of interest quickly I thought
this book was interesting actually this
is cat Annie's book called herding
Hemingway's cats how our genes work
it has a lot of stuff on epigenetics
which is interesting and it's coming to
life well that's great because that was
a question that we didn't get to so you
can read a book on it instead yes you
can really look like that instead yes
your books are less visible I'd say this
is the UK edition but it's transcendence
which is very in the u.s. as well by
Gaia Vince and it's about humans
evolution through fire language beauty
and time so it's all about human ideas
human evolution in a way in a fully
social way fantastic book right well
that's interesting to know that you're
reading books rather than just wading
through documents at Cold Spring Harbor
but thank thank you very much but for
your for your answer to those questions
well and I'm sorry to all the people who
asked questions we didn't have time for
and I'll just thank you back - I
actually Richard I want to add one more
question because it's sort of related to
me in my I'm very happy that you know
from participants we received the
question and the question was to see it
and this is many original documents are
shown in the documentaries and how can
viewers find this document so we can
look at them and if they're publicly
available it's actually to both of you
well so a Miller this is - thank you as
well because the cold spring harbor
archives are a very valuable resource in
fact what one thing that I that is a
very very valuable resource is that you
can actually search you don't need to I
mean I'm sure you'd welcome them to go
to the coastal Harbor but a lot of those
documents are online and they're
searchable and in fact they're
searchable
they're actually very well indexed so
for instance you can if you'd like to
you could there are a series of
interviews
with various geneticists and biologists
there are also original letters which
are housed there you can read if you
wanted to read Rosalind Franklin's notes
you can access them not directly through
the CSH gel but through a portal that
the CSI shell of course we Harbor
laboratories has you can see her first
impressions of photograph 51 online
never leaving your home and Matthew I
know you've worked directly at the
archives so tell us a little bit about
that yeah well I I was working there on
the life and work of sydney brenner
great British geneticist who won Nobel
Prize for his work on on C elegans and
yeah just every times actually hey sorry
I meant it
very funny man yeah and I worked at the
archives I was looking at his
correspondence in particular with
Francis Crick and sometimes rather risky
postcards they'd send each other in the
1960s and all these you can I mean you
can see them online but after the
pandemic is over then go and visit if
you can get a chance to visit the
archive to actually see the original
document is extraordinary to feel it to
to see what has been said I mean you
know amazing documents that are that are
present they're absolutely fantastic
resource both of you it's actually for
me like it pleasure to hear just because
we have so many scholars come in can use
it and we're open to the public so
everyone who wants to come to see it
they can see it for those of us who have
enjoyed so much seed your books and
watching the documentary it has been
fascinating to hear these personal
reflections also might even see it thank
you very very much to share it with us
actually use secrets of writing and to
answering
to all participants questions thank you
Richard to work so hard on this and
thank you very much to the participants
but I want to emphasize that it will be
it is recording and it will be available
your conversation and all event on
YouTube as well are at our CHL that are
easy you website and on the website of
the Center for Humanities they can grab
much for participation